Add GB report for Dec 2024 (#2589)
matrix-org/matrix.org: content/blog/2024/12/2024-12-20-governing-board-first-report.md

of the GB is often in the background, and we want to be as transparent as we
can.

<!-- more -->

### What’s been happening?

Since our election in June, the GB has mainly been focussed on internal
structure. We began with the most basic part of this - getting to know each
other! We have quite a large group, and we all needed time to understand what
each of us would like to achieve, and to assist with. We also needed to get to
know the Foundation better, and time spent with Josh has been extremely
valuable too.

The other, even bigger, topic to tackle has been structure. We are a new board,
and as such we need to lay down the processes and hierarchy that will govern
our work in the near-to-medium future. There is ample inspiration around us in
the many other communities we are part of, but we do have to write down our
versions of these.

### What about the recent Governing Board meeting?

The GB had its first official meeting on Nov 15th, and the topic of structure
took up all of our time - this is key since that structure is blocking the work
we want to do in various topic areas (which we’re calling Committees). There

> are detailed minutes [available here](TBD LINK from Josh) but here is a high

Author: @joshsimmons ^

level summary - you’ll note that these all relate to the structure and norms of
the GB:

* We elected our first Chair and ViceChair - Greg Sutcliffe (gwmngilfen) and Kim Brose (HarHarLinks) respectively
* We discussed some of the core elements of the GB - voting processes, quorum, timescales, etc

> * We discussed the organisation layout, Committee, and Working Groups - more detail on that below

Author: Good catch, let me fix that.

* We talked a lot about norms as well - how we expect members of the GB to behave.

The last point is actually really important - while it sounds quite simple,
it’s critical for setting expectations for us and also helps set overall policy
when an explicit rule or process doesn’t exist. The culture that we set out
with this first board will likely set the tone for the future, and we should
get it right.

### Committees and Working Groups

Probably the decision with the biggest impact (thought we agreed it fairly
quickly) was around the hierarchy of the GB, so let’s expand on that a bit.

> As we reported in TWIM [at the time](LINK), we have convened 4 initial

Author: :+1:

Committees (Governance, Trust & Safety, Community, and Finance & Fundraising),
and these are board-level subgroups with a focus on that specific area. Each
Committee will have one or more Working Groups (WG) that focus on something
related to that topic, and WGs must have a board member involved - but can (and
probably should) involve more people from the community who wish to be involved
in that effort.

Drawing on my own background in operating systems, this is somewhere between
the CentOS model (which just has Special Interest Groups under the CentOS
Board) and Fedora (which has a [detailed & complex org
chart](https://fedoracom.wpenginepowered.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/orgchart-1024x492.png)).
As an example, we’ll (probably) have a Website WG under the Community
Committee.

Each Committee and WG will need a charter - this can be pretty short, but sets
out the remit of that group. Committees will also need a Chair (and probably a

> Vicechair, just in case) so that we can ensure things keep ticking along. Those

Reviewer: wouldn't it be?
```suggestion
Vice Chair, just in case) so that we can ensure things keep ticking along. Those
```

Author: :+1:

positions are open for voting within the GB at the moment!

For the community, you can expect regular reports from the committees once
they’ve formed, and we’ll bring those to you as we can - how we do reporting
with transparency is also a topic we're discussing. You can also expect a
process for people to propose new Working Groups - that is also under discussion!

### Reports?

Yes! So, as said above, the Committees will have an obligation to report on
their activity. Since most have only existed for 3 weeks so far, there’s not
yet much to say, but I hope that in the next few weeks we’ll be able to
announce the Committees are up-and-running, and that we have a proposal system
for new WGs.

We also have a report from the Spec Core Team which they’ve asked us to share

> with you - you can [read that here](LINK TBD from Josh)

Reviewer: another link here :)

Author: @joshsimmons ^

chart](https://fedoracom.wpenginepowered.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/orgchart-1024x492.png)).
As an example, we’ll (probably) have a Website WG under the Community
Committee.

Each Committee and WG will need a charter - this can be pretty short, but sets
out the remit of that group. Committees will also need a Chair (and probably a
Vice Chair, just in case) so that we can ensure things keep ticking along. Those
positions are open for voting within the GB at the moment!

For the community, you can expect regular reports from the committees once
they’ve formed, and we’ll bring those to you as we can - how we do reporting
with transparency is also a topic we're discussing. You can also expect a
process for people to propose new Working Groups - that is also under discussion!

### Reports?

Yes! So, as said above, the Committees will have an obligation to report on
their activity. Since most have only existed for 3 weeks so far, there’s not
yet much to say, but I hope that in the next few weeks we’ll be able to
announce the Committees are up-and-running, and that we have a proposal system
for new WGs.

We also have a report from the Spec Core Team which they’ve asked us to share

> with you - you can [read that SCT report here](/assets/governance/governing-board/2024-11-15-sct-report.pdf).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with you - you can [read that SCT report here](/assets/governance/governing-board/2024-11-15-spec-core-team-report.pdf).
```
